RUNCMD(7)                   The runcmd exercise                       RUNCMD(7)

NAME
	runcmd - execute a program in a subprocess

SYNOPSIS
	int runcmd(const char *command, int *result, const int[3] io);

	void (*runcmd_onexit)(void) = NULL;

DESCRIPTION
	runcmd() executes the program specified by 'command' in a subprocess.
	If the return argument 'result' is not null, information on the 
	subprocess execution is stored in this variable after the function
	returns and can be inspected with the aid of a set of macros available
	for this purpose. The argument 'io' is a pointer to an array of integers
	where the first, second and third positions should contain the file 
	descriptors to where the subprocess' standard input, standard output 
	and standard errors are to be redirected; if 'io' is null, no 
	redirection is performed. 

	The command line specified by 'command' must be a string of blank-
	separated words where the first word is interpreted as the name of the
	program to be executed and the remainder words are its arguments, except
	for the last word if this starts with the character '&' (see ahead)

	runcmd() will block until the subprocess completes, unless nonblocking
	mode is evoked.  Nonblocking mode is activated if the last word of
	'command' is the ampersand character and it causes runcmd() to return
	immediately, while the subprocess executes in parallel.  In nonblocking
	mode, if the caller process stores the address of a function to the
	global variable runcmd_onexit, this function will be called 
	asynchronously upon the termination of the subprocess. 

	In blocking mode, information about the command execution is stored
	in argument 'result' upon the subprocess termination. The following
	macros are provided to inspect the result:


	IS_NORMTERM(result) returns true if the subprocess has terminated 
                            normally; false otherwise

	IS_NONBLOCK(result) returns true if the subprocess has been executed
                            in nonblocking mode; false otherwise.

        IS_EXECOK(result)   returns true if 'command' has been effectively 
			    executed; false otherwise.

        EXITSTATUS(result)  returns the exit status returned by the
                            subproccess.

	The following observations are worthy of note:

	* runcmd() works by calling 'fork' to create a subprocess and one of 
	the members of the 'exec' family of functions to execute 'command' If 
	'exec'fails to replace the subrocess image (e.g. because the program is
	not found or the caller has no execution permission), the value exit
	status received in 'result' is that of the unchanged subprocess image
	and not of the specified command.  IS_EXECOK() returns EXECFAILSTATUS 
	if the function has not been able to execute 'command'. It should be 
	bear in mind, however, that a successful executed command may itself 
	return the value of EXITSTATUSFAIL, and this solely information may 
	not be regarded as an evidence that command execution has failed. 
	As for that, the macro IS_EXECKOK() may be used for disambiguation.  
	
	* If a process terminates abnormally, then its exit status has no
	 meaning. In this case, EXITSTATUS() returns zero.

	* in nonblocking mode, the subprocess termination and exit status are 
	  not known by the time runcmd() returns.  In this case IS_NORMTERM(),
	  EXITSTATUS() and EXECOK(), all them return zero and have no meaning.
	  The caller process may use IS_NONBLOCK() for disambiguation. 

	Subprocess's standard input, output and error may be redirected. To that
	end the caller must pass a pointer to an array of tree integers as the
	argument 'io'.  The integers are interpreted as files descriptors of
	previously opened files. Files are neither closed nor flushed by the
	function.  runcmd() does not check if write/write operations are
	correctly performed.


RETURN VALUE

       On success, runcmd() returns the subprocess' pid; on failure, returns -1.

CONFORMING TO

	POSIXeg v1.

NOTES
	runcmd() interpret every blank-separated word of 'command' as an
	argument to be passed to one of the members of the 'exec' family of
	functions, except for the last word if it starts with '&'. In this case
	the function interpret it as a symbol indicating that the function 
	should return immediately instead of blocking until the subprocess
	completes. For instance if 'command' is 'prog arg1 arg2 argN &', 
	then function will execute 'prog' with arguments 'arg1', 'arg2' and
	'arg3' in nonblocking mode. Unlike 'system' function of standard C
	library, function runcmd() does not interpret any other character other
	than a trailing '&' as a special symbol. For instance, characters '<' 
	and '|', understood as the redirection and pipe symbols by /bin/sh, 
	respectively, are interpreted as any other character by runcmd ().
	For instance, if 'command' is 'prog arg > out', 'prog' is executed
	with arguments 'arg', '>' and 'out'. Input-output redirection either
	for files or pipes can be achieved by means of built-in functionality
	accessible with 'io' parameter.


	If the caller process stores the address of a function to the global
	variable runcmd_onexit, this function is registered as a handler
	for the signal SIGCHLD. If this signal is blocked or ignored by
	the caller process, runcmd_onexit() will not be invoked.

	runcmd() does not perform any terminal control policy. Both the caller
	process and the subprocess are executed in the same session so that
	conflict in accessing the terminal be arise (SIGTTIN and SIGTTOUT are
	not handled specially).

	Parameter 'command' is unchanged after execution.	

EXAMPLE

	runcmd ("ls foo", &result, NULL);

	executes the 'ls'. If 'ls' runs successfully and file 'foo' is found,
	EXECOK(result), IS_NONBLOCK(result) and IS_NORMTERM(result), all them
	return true and EXITSTATUS(result) returns o (ls returns 0 on success);
	if 'foo' is not found, EXITSTATUS(result) returns 2 (ls man page).

	runcmd ("nosuchfile", &result, NULL);

	if 'nosuchfile' cannot be executed, EXECOK(result) returns false, 
	IS_NONBLOCK(result) returns true, IS_NORMTERM(result) returns false
	and EXITSTATUS(result) return EXECFAILSTATUS.


SEE ALSO

        POSIXeg documentation.

AUTHORS
	 runcmd skeleton was written by Monaco F. J. as part of POSIXeg project.

REPORTING BUGS

	Bugs may be reported to monaco@icmc.usp.br.

COLOPHON

	The implementation of runcmd() provided by POSIXeg is a skeleton to be
	developed as an exercise. The work consists in completing the 
	implementation to meet the specifications outlined in this man-page-like
	documentation file, and according to README.TXT. Good job.

COPYRIGHT

	This file is part of part of POSIX Exempli Gratia - POSIXeg.
    	Copyright (c) 2015 Francisco Jose Monaco <monaco@icmc.usp.br>
    	POSIXeg is Free Open Source Software, distributed under the terms ofthe
	General Public License version 3 any later version. You may obtain a 
	copy of the licence and the sorce code from POSIXeg repository at 
	https://gitlab.com/monaco/posixeg

	You may redistribute this file with your own project either 'as is' or
	as a derivative work. If you do so, please retain this copyright note
	and add some annotation explicitly stating your modifications. 
